---
layout: post
title: 'Rogue Gadgets'
description: ""
date: Thu Jan 05 2012 00:20:24 GMT+0000 (Greenwich Mean Time)
redirect_from: 
            - http://blog.tfd.co.uk/2012/01/05/rogue-gadgets/
categories: "Gadget, OCLC, OpenSocial, Uncategorized"
hero: ../../../defaultHero.jpg
---
I have long thought one of the problems with OpenSocial is its openness to enable any Gadget based app anywhere. Even if there is a technical solution to the problem of a rogue App in the browser sandbox afforded by the iframe that simply defers the issue. Sure, the Gadget code that is the App, can't escape the iframe sandbox and interfere with the in browser container or other iframe hosted apps in from the same source. Unfortunately wonderful technical solutions are of little interest to a user whose user experience if impacted by the safe but rogue app. The app may be technically well behaved, but downright offensive and inappropriate on many other levels, and this is an area which has given many institutions food for thought when considering gadget based platforms like Google Apps for Education. A survey of the gadgets that a user could deploy via an open gadget rendering endpoint reveals that many violate internal policies of most organizations. Racial and sexual equality are often compromised. Even basic decency. It's the openness of the gadget renderer that causes the problem, in many cases when deployed, it will render anything its given. It's not hard to find gadgets providing porn in gmodules the source of iGoogle, not exactly what an institution would want to endorse on its staff/student home pages.

For too long there has been an assumption that it's the responsibility of the user to self police. That's fine where the environment is offered by an organisation that can claim to be "only the messenger", but when an environment is offered by an organization that is more than a messenger, self policing doesn't hold water. The weakness of the OpenSocial gadget environment is its openness. It's hard, if not impossible to control what gadgets are available and put the onus on the container to control what is loaded.

## Trusting Mobile Apps

There is a parallel to this problem in the mobile device industry seen in the difference between Android and iOS. Android is open, the environment allows developers to do almost anything they like and have full access to all features of the phone. The Android Market with over 400K apps on it is often reported as being ["wild west"](http://www.techradar.com/news/phone-and-communications/mobile-phones/400000-apps-now-available-on-android-market-1051674) to quote "...Unlike Apple's strict approval policy, the Android Market is seen a little like the Wild West of the mobile, with many applications getting through which would never make the cut on iOS.... ". That leaves the user with plenty of choice but exposed to a lot of risk. It's spawning an industry of FUD, based on real fears and dangers generating a new revenue stream for those that profited from virus and malware explosions on PCs. This time it's a mobile device where the user may have placed far more trust in the device than they know (money, bank details, authentication, liability), and has far less ability to do anything about it (there I go, adding to the FUD).

Don't get me wrong, as a developer, I don't like the iOS approval process, but I think it's a necessary evil to ensure that those providing the market place or store know that what they are pushing onto the unsuspecting public won't do harm. Firstly the iOS platform protects the device from the rogue developer. Secondly the approval process ensures that the app conforms to the guidelines, not eating the battery or using up all the users monthly bandwidth allowance in a day. Thirdly, although not always the case, the approval process ensures that the soft factors of the app are acceptable. I haven't tried, but I suspect an app that worked as a terrorist bomb trigger app, and gave step by step instructions how to do it would not pass the soft factors inspection. Consequently users of the iOS platform feel that they can trust the apps they are being sold. There is no aftermarket industry in end-user protection as there is no business case to support it.

In the Gadget environment, it's the gadget renderer that is the equivalent to the store. By rendering a gadget, the renderer is not just a "messenger" not to be blamed, it's saying something about what its rendering. If the gadget renderer doesn't do that, then I have to argue that you should not trust the gadget rendered. It could be pushing anything at you, you might trust it, but if it doesn't trust what it's sending you, how can you trust what it sends? Would you accept a package from a person in a uniform before boarding a plan, just because the uniform had a badge with the word "security" on it? No, neither would I. If they had a gun and ID, I would still ask them why I should be trusted to carry it.

## OCLC WorldShare

There are some OpenSocial gadget renderers that care about their reputation. Most Libraries are considered to be trusted sources of information and [OCLC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_Computer_Library_Center) with a membership of 72000 libraries, museums and archives in 170 countries has a reputation it and its membership cares about. OCLC recently launched [WorldShare](http://www.oclc.org/us/en/worldshare-platform/howitworks/default.htm), an OpenSocial based platform that uses Apache Shindig to render Gadgets and provide access for those gadgets to a wealth of additional information feeds. It does not provide the container in which to mount the Gadgets but it provides a trusted and respected source of rendered Gadgets. This turns the OpenSocial model on its head. A not for profit organisation delivering access to vast stores of information via OpenSocial and the Gadget feeds. Suddenly the gadget rendered feed is the only thing that matters. The container could be provided by OCLC, but equally by members. OCLC has wisely decided to [certify](http://www.oclc.org/developer/platform/certification) any gadget that it is prepared to serve. Like the iOS certification and approval process, WorldShare's certification is based on technical and soft criteria. That process will hopefully ensure quality, add value and protect its uses from the wild west. Just as we trust our libraries to truthfully hold and classify knowledge, I hope that the WorldShare's realisation that the vendor has a responsibility, will give as all the confidence to continue to trust OCLC as a source.
